Ward-Griffin et al. (2017)

Ward-Griffin et al. (2017)
Tuesday, 8 May 2018
8:03 AM

![Machine generated alternative text: SHORT COMMUNICATION  Petting away pre-exam stress: The effect of therapy dog  sessions on student well-being  Emma Ward-GriffinlO I Patrick I Hanne K. Collinsl I Rhea L. Owens3  Stanley Corenl I  Frances S. Chenl (D  of psychology. university of  WILEY  BlitiEh Va  BC. camd3  Department of  Freie  and  of NMth D*ota,  Fens. NO. usA  pho_  of British Columbia.  2521-2136 west Man.  "knce wd  of Canada, Grant,'Award Number  1 INTRODUCTION  Recentty, many universities have implemented programm— in which therapy dogs and their han•  dhrs Visit college Campuses. Despite the immense populgrity Of therapy dog sessions. few ran-  Stucfies have empirically tested the efficacy of Such ngrameS_ The present Study  evaluates the efficacy of sur.h a theram• dog programme in improving the well-being of university  Students. This research two (a) g pre/post within-subjects design. in  which 246 participants completed a Wief questionnaire • rrwEdiately before and after a therapy  dog session and an experimental design with a deåsed-treatment control group. in which all  partkipants baseline nuasureS and meawreS 10 hr later.  Only partlCipant5 in the experimental cmcfltion experienced the therapy sessim in between  the baseline and measures. Analvses of pre/m.>5t data raealed that the therapy dog  sessiOrB had strong hrnediate benefits. significant* reducing stress and increasing happiræss  and levels, In addltior„ in the experimental group reported a greater improve•  mænt in negative affect. perceived social support, and perceived stress compared with those in  the de-laved-treatment control grwap_ OL' results Su.st that Sirwle. drop-in. therapy dog  sions have large and effects on stLKients' well-bemg, but that effects after sew  era' hours are small.  KEYWORDS  stress social supp&t_ uriversity stu&nts, well-beng  The new social and challenges that students face as they  enter and progress through university often lead to heightened  Stress. Students been found to have higher  rates Of psychological distress than general popLAatian (Eskin  et al., 2016: Stallman, 2010). Students' les"'ls of stress rise upon entry  to university and do not return to their preuniversity through-  Out their time  n uniursity (gewick_ Koutsogou Ou_ Miles. Saga.  Barkham, 2010). Furthermore. stress is the most commonw reported  barrier to Students' academic (American College Health Asso-  ciation. 2016a, 2016b).  University students also commonly face emotional and wcial diffi-  Culties_ A of American college students revealed that in the past  year, felt ven' felt very sad. and 50 depressed  that they it difficult to function College Health ASSO-  CiatiOn. 2016a.201661 F-Lrtherrru3re_ Students with lower qua fit-y socia  201&.1-6  support terpd to more depressive symptoms & Eisenberg.  Considering the marry' challenges w.iursity Students face. and  the consequerx— of these challenges. to  reduce student stress and improve health and well-being are of utmost  Animal-assisted stress reduct•n programmes have become  popular on univt-sity campuses as g rman-s Of promoting  Student well-being. These programmes bringing animals and  their handlers to college campuses to interact with students. A recent  investigation thgt Of Surveyed universities in tire United  States raving such the maÄrltv of exclu•  sively dogs (Haggerty Mueller. 2017). Prtwious æsearch has  that 'Iteracting with dogs æduces phrßOlOgiCal • ndicatc«s Of  stress, meliness, (see Kather & Beck, 2010•, Wens,  2009, for ra'iews), reduces anxiety and increases positive affect  (Crossman. Kazdin. & Knudson, 2015). entourages the initiation  of contact between people (Bernstein, Friedma,nn. & Malaspina,  2018 Wiley & Ltd.](../../_resources/34fe7a673efec27a8901cec8d7ba68bb.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: WILEY  A common for therapy dog programmes  a large grc•up of students interacting "ith dogs and their handlers dur-  ing a single drop•in sesion (e.g. Logn 2016; Roll't. 2016). This format  has the advantage of being able to reach a much larger of stu-  dents over a shorter period Of tirrpe than Other more time- and  re-source-interbive that have to hue positive  effects on students' well-being (e.g., an 8-week intervention with ther-  guy dogs. Binfet & Passmore. 2016). On the Other hand. the brief  grOLP format might dilute the immediate and lasting benefits  evidence regarding the effects Of the Single drop-in  dog sesion fornat has ons' recent* to Initia  stucfies h.we prcw•icied that a single drop- n group therapy  dog tempvyarily stress and increases  students' feelngs of connecticjl to the" campus (Binfet. 2017),  improves mood and well-being, and decreases anxiety (Grajfoner,  Harte. Lauren. & McGuigan. 201 n These effects were  in-mediately following t'urapy do-g session but seem to be rela-  tively short-lived: No detectable efttrts were found 2 •weks after  the sessions (ginfet. 201 n. although qualitative evidence SOÆCStS  that, 3 students belleve that therapy dog  vided lasting benefits (Dell et al., 20151. Adambe, Riley. and Carlson  (2W9) that Students perceive tf02-ir pets Of  and wggest that therapy animals may act as  sources of social support while students establish new relationships.  Therapy dog sessions also been to female stw  dents more than students (Dell et 2015), suggesting the  need for research into gender differences and demographic  1.1 The present study  In fight Of the prevalence Of therapy dog sessions on university  purses and the Large body of evidence showing many benefits of inter-  with dogs. conducted a systematic investigation into the  potential benefits Of a single on•carnpuS drapin eurapy dog session  on students' "ell-being. In this studv, we operationalize "high levels  Of well-being' as irkludir'g low perceived Stress and negative affect.  and high levels Of positive affect happiness, and social  port. We used an ecologically valid design in which our participants'  experiences Were Similar to that Of a Student attending drop-in  sess;on_ These therapy fig sess;ons took place during midterm exam  season, a time when students are particularlv Abouserie,  1994; et al., 2011). using g propost design.  effects of these on students' happiness, stress.  and energy To ad&ess open questions regarding the longevity  Of effects. We also experimentally investigated the effects Of the ther-  apy dog on students' well-being amoroximately 10 hr after the  experimental group had attended a therapy dog session. On an explor-  gtory Oasis. v"' examined possibk' g-etkler differences. The following  primary hypotheses were  H I : Students revXYt decreased Stress. and  and 'WVineSS immediately after attending a  Qpy dog sess.on immediate'y  2  2.1  H2: assigned to attend the therapy  dos session wi," exverience yeorer decreases in st'ess  and negative affect, and larger in positive affect.  happnes_5, lite and perceived  relative to delayed-treatment porticipo•nts up to  1 day otter therapy session.  METHODS  Participan ts  45.5% students, -19A,SO 3m  Were recruited from psychology Cigsses at a large  Canadian Uliversty. Parncigxants course for par•  ticiøat•n. Students were d-eemed ineligible to participate if they  repo-ted being allergic to dogs. afraid Of umvillirw to into-act With  therapy dogs. and/or durng the trerap•y  dog session times. A total of 357 students were deerrred eligible to par-  ticipate; Of 246 (124 control) participated at a' time points and  were 'n the rates dld not differ  groups, - 0.69. p - .40S. and participants in the experimental  did not differ frtN-n control condition on key  deu)graphic (ps _05; see the Supparnng Information for  infornvuionl. The sttdv was at»roved by the institutional  ethics The data Can be found On Open Science  2.2  2.2. I I  Procedure  Participants were rancf3rnS' assigned to the experirrW1tal or delayed•  treatment control group using a random number generator. All partic-  i.ants first completed the Ogselime questionnaire. Participants in both  conditions were then ernai•d identical messages •rwiting them to a  therapy dog session. The only difference between the emails æceived  Was date that the participants were asked to attend. During their  Session. partic•pants (in bath conditions} completed a &ief survey  gyior to entering the therapy dag space, interacted with the  dogs. and completed one more brief suA•ey after exiting the scs-  Sian; these served as our W'thin•subiect pre," post measures, Follcmying  the experimental group's therapy dog session [but prior to the  delayed-treatment control session). participants in both  ditims completed cuestionnaires on the same  This procedure allowed us to assess diffe•ences across the two  corulitions: one with. one Without. to the therapy dog  session. Figure I provides an of the study procedures and  timeline.  2.22 1 Baseline (TIJ  At TI, all participants conu»leted the consent form and eligibility sur-  Vey. they completed the Satisfaction With Life Scale  Larsen, & Griffin, 1985), Subjective Happness Scale  [Lvubomirsky & Leoper, 1999), A.)5itive and Negative Affect *hedule  Clark, Tellegen. 1988). Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen.](../../_resources/826355cc1e66880f81b55b2e180000f8.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: WORD-GRIFFIN  Control  Baseline 01)  Experimental  FIGURE 1 Data collection time a n d proc ed ure  Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983), Medical Outcomes Study Social  port Survey & Stewart. 1991). survey  Online. More on the measures Can be fowld in the  Suppwting Info n-nation.  2.2.3 1 Therapy dog session  All dog sessions took place in a Large room at a stud&lt union  building on campus. At each 90-min session, between 7 and 11 ther-  guy dogs their from the Vancouver ecoVile•2 Therapy  Dog Programme, were present. All therapy dogs had standard-  ized training and assessment criteria, including rigorous veterinary  Checks. no history Of aggression or biting. good and friendly  interaction with strangers.  The flow of participants entering the space was monitored to  that all participants had the opportw.ity for Contact with the  dogs. partici*ants were not glven instructims regarding "hat  to do during the session and instead free to talk to other students  or as well as interact with dogs.  tion that most students spent a Slgnlficant of the time  touching, petting looking at, and talking to the theram,' dogs.  age, participants spent 3092 (SO = 15.83) min in the space,  completlng the brief waiting in line to enter, ard interacting  with the therapy dogs. As participants left the session, thea/ competed  post-session  2.24 1 Therapy dog session Surveys  entering the and again as they left the session. all partic-  i*nts completed a S•item assessing how Stressed.  happy, and energized they currently felt on a visual avulogue  (see Supporting Information for informatirn.  1 up Survey  Following the experimental partlcpant5' therapy dog session.  d&ved-treatrru2-nt control and experirnental participants Were emailed  follow nup cuestiannaires that included the measwes as the base•  line questionnaire. Particioants coul•d complete these questionnaires at  any point OWY the next 24 On average. participants completed the  Survey hr (SO = 992) after the session.  3 RESULTS  3.1 Analysis strategy  To test the efficacy of the therapy dog session, repeated measures anal-  vscs Of variance (ANOVAS) used. the immediate (SYOrt•term)  WILEY  Follow-up (T2)  effects, Step I was a mode' with one within-subject factor For  the effects at follOWQjp. Step I Was g model With one Within-sub*ect  factor arvd fixed factor (Condition). both sets Of  Step 2 consisted of the adcfltion of another fixed factor (gender) to the  to examine OOSSible effects With gender.  3.2 Immediate (short-term) effects  To test changes uppiness, stress, and levels,  repeted measures ANOVAs were conducted comparing all  participants' (both Contro and uperinmtall  responses immediately before and after their therapy dog session (see  Figure 2). Participants' Stress bevels Significantly lower after the  therapy dog session. RI. 21B) = 344.97, p 001. = 613. and  participants' uppiness, F(l, 223) p n2 274, and  energy HI. 222) 113.10. p -338. Were Significantly  higher after therapy dog session, all with large effect sizes.  Gender differences and immediate effects  3.21 1  T here  was no moderating effect of gender on immediate results  (stress, happiness, and energy; all ps .05, see Supporting Information  for full  Statisti  3.3  Effects at follow-up (T2)  In Step I, we tested for differences between the and  delayed-treatment control groups. using repeated measures ANOVAS  •nauding corklition as a fixed and the follcwup  scales as repeated measures factors,  FIGURE 2 Means for stress, arpd energy immedately  before and after attending the therapy dc-g session](../../_resources/800183fdfd407a49c0337c7d53e2c5e1.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: WILEY  The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect ot time on negative  affect and affect. but not on the other dependent variables.  Specifically. participants in both coryditit:ns slX3wed a decEne both  and pcßtive affect across tme_ The ANOVA cid not reveal  g Significant ma in e Of CO ndition Of the variables  (see Table g. I in Supporting  Most critically to our hypotheses, there was a significant interac-  tim time and condition negatiw2 affect, perceived Stress.  and Support That is. the effect Of time on participants'  of negatlve affect, percaved stress, and social support depended on  the participants' Participants in the experimental group  reported Significantly greater reo:tiOrrs in rægative affect = —050  on a 7-point scale) than In the del"ed-treatment control group  = —0.27). Experimental participants' perceived Stress  —0,11 on a 7-paint wheøeas stress ot the control partici•  pants increased slightlv - 0.061. Additiona Iy, participants in the  experimental condition in social Support time  = 0_10 On a 7•paint scakI whereas Control participants decreased  slightly in perceived social support - —0.03). Analyses reveabed  that the effect Of the therapy dog sessions on perceived support  was primarily hen the affectionate (see T able  In contrast to our h•mtheses, no significant interactions betw•een time  and condition "c' e Obsened for happiness. positive affect, satisfac-  tion with lite (all ps ,29), SLægestng that the effects of therapy dog  sessions are somewhat selective in nature.  3.3.1 1 Gender effects at follow-up  In Step 2. gender as a fixed Was added to the We did not  find a S'gnlficant interact'on between condition, and gender (all  PS > .05. See Supporting Information for full Statistics). indicating no  effects for the efficacy Of therapy dog  7.4S.V  HI, 244) - P  4  DISCUSSION  Cons'stent with past research, results of this study  dente that therapy dog sessions university Camp•aSCS p•ositive  effects on students' well-being, We reductions in  stress and irrreases in happiness and energy levels immediately after  the therapy dog Sessions.  We also fow.d evdence of several benefits of the therapy dog  sessions approximate-IV 10 hr later. AS predicted. participants in the  group experienced a greater reduction in negative  affect and perceived stress, as well as an increase in perceived social  following the experirnental group'S session With  the delayed-treatment control group. Overall. differences in %3Cial  suppcyt. perceived stress, affect were small, The ther  apy dog sessions did not have g lasting effect happiness. positive  affect. Or life satisfaction, wggesting that the effects are somewhat  selective,  Our results are in With showing short-term  psychologcal be-befits of therapy sessions tBnfet, 2017;  Crossman et al., 2015; Crump Derting, 2015: Grajfoner et al.,  2017; Ratchet & Beck. 2010: McDonald. McDonald. &  20171 unlike syevious research on this top'c (e.g..  dintet & Pasmore, 2016), our study was designed to mirror the con-  ditions Of a typical Single drop-in group dog session (e.g.  Logan, 2016; Rollit, Ow study also fills a research gap regard'  ing the longevity of th«apv dog session benefits, as it examines  effects at a time between tfv2 immediate effects Of a Single  drop- n therapy fig (Grajfoner et al., 2017), the Lack of  effects 2 •w*'ks later dinfet. 20171, and the qualitative perceived  effects 3 r&3nthS lat* (Oell et al_ 20151 Although past æsearch  has found evidence of benefitting mare from therapy fig  sessions than rræn (Dell et 2015), our results did not replicate this  finding.  The present study several limitations, First, the of a  pre/gost design does not allow us to make claims about the  Short•term effect Of a therapy dog session Secord the design Of our  study does not enable us to which factcy- (therapy fig  handlers. and/or peers} contributed to the benefits. HOV+  given that past research has benefits Of do-g Ses•  signs, and handlers alone et al, 2017), It seems  probable that the dogs Were the primary to these effects.  TABLE 1 Results of repeated measures analyses of variance with TI (baseline) and 12 as repeated measures factor and condition as  fixed fac  Dependent vari*le  rive a  *ale  Subjective Scale  SatisfactiM' with Lite Sc*e  Social up p  Social  Sæial  Social sup p ate  Sæial w  M (SD) control M (SD) M (SD) control  Tl 124)  2.33 (0.70)  340 (073)  4.57 (120)  476 (123)  3,78  3.72 (0.95)  376 (106)  3.94 (088)  T2 (n 1241  2,06 (0661  2.96  454 (1.131  479 (LIE!  (0, 811  3.6B (0.951  376  3,72  390 (087)  122)  2m (0.81)  289 (076)  1.95  (1.06)  4.76 (1:22)  3.93  (0.79)  391 (103)  3.95 (107)  4110.84)  Effect Of tine • CO n&tion  25010.76)  3411063)  206  4.5811.11)  484 IL 23  3,83  3.7610.112)  377  3,82  4.06 (0.84)  oss,p-  HI, 244) z 0.01,v: .94Qn2-.o:jo  294. re-cos  244):  C09  244) - 1.33, p -  , 244)  030  019  032, n' . 019  027  Note, are Inferential statistics on the main effects of time and condition are provided in Table of the Suggnrting Information, M mean  SD = &-viatm PANAS = Negative](../../_resources/4f138b65b4fb45091857619dff74b666.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: WORD-GRIFFIN  Thir4 the use of a delayed-treatnz-,t cmtrol allowed us to  analyse the benefits of a therac:r,' dog session as compared with the  regular activities of university st&nts. we are Lnab'e to compare  these benefits Nth other stress management interventions (see  Klainin-Yobas. 00. Ying. & Lau. 2015. a Future  re-search Should Consider implementing an active Control in  which control participants participate in other stress management  interventions to avoid potential demand effects.  results of this study wggest that Single. drop•in.  groLO therapy dog on campus likely benefit students'  well-being and reduce Stress in the imrnediate period followirw the  session. The results also provide uppcrt Of some effects  lasting for several hows afterwards results are consistent  With past research that indicates that campus therapy dog  prwamm— h.we effects on students but that these  effects diminish over time (Binfet, 20171, Thus, it may be especially  useful sessions to take plate during particularly Stressful  periods of the school SXh as exam periods. Or even for ther•  am,' dogs be present during stressors. such as while students com-  phte Future Studies Should also investigate the specific  of therapy dog on unngsit-y campuses that may  lead to strong Ong-lasting effects, such as the optimal ength of time  for Students to be engaged in the o' the optirnal ratio Of  students to therapy dogs_  Given the high lewels of stress and emotional difficulties in univer-  Sib,' stLAentS, it is hportant to design accessible to  stress and Improve well-being The results of study  that therapy dog sessions considerablv reduce stress and improve  aspects Of Student Although these gre Strong imme-  diate•'y the effects after a short period of fink are  small. We hope that this Study Will help to future best practices  in designing therapy dog inteNentiOr%, which will turn faciEtate  well-beng n university students.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This studv was supported by a grant (430-2015-00412) from the  Science and Research of Canada. We thank  Quille Kaddon Vancouver ecoV.llage for organizng and coordinat-  ing the therapy dog sessions and making this Study possiBe. A  thank to all the VarKOuver ecoVillage theragø,' dog harxdlers ard  their canine convanims for volunteering their tlme. We gratefdly  acknowledge the University Of gritish Columbia Alma Mater Society  for providing space for sessions and for LB to advertise  the study, and the instructors who us to recruit students from  their Classes. Finally. thunk Nandini Mghargj. Kiang Maeda. Sara  Ahmadian_ Sarah Woolgar, Par-ky Lau, and entire research team  for assistarxe with data collection. contacting participants, and ensur-  ing the therapy dog sessions ran smoothly.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST  The authors have declared that they have no Of interest  ORCID  WardGffin O http:/.'orcidorg.'DOOO-OOD2-0717-0673  WILEY  patrtk KlaiberO http,'/orcid.org/ocoo.0002-1957-1140  Frances S Chen http:/,'wcid.wg,'OOOO-0003-2322-1095  REFERENCES  Abenserie, R. 11994). Sources levels Stress in relation to Of coo-  It in stL&nts_ Psycmogy.  323-330. https./,'doi.org/10.1080/0144341940140306  Adam'e. K. N.. RiEy. T. A_, & (20391 Sadent  Interest in Pet Therapy. Of Coge Hearth, 57151  545-548  College Amiation (201631 AæiQn CcAk-ge Health  College Holth A—nt Il: Rcfcmnæ  Executive Summary Spring 2016.  American College Health Association (2016b). American College Health  Ami ation College HQlth 2015-2016  W. E. St«k. C.. UK  Parke, S. Dnies, S, (2011). Feel". healthy? A  of of  Sities the UK. Of  Public 8, 1308-1323.  Benwtein. P L. A.  rcs.dmt n  Anth,ozads, 13, 213-224.  089279300786999743  a, Miles slaa. & M 120101  Changes in undergraduate Students' as  ttvwgh H.gtm• 35 633-645  httpsWdoiorg,'1010äN0307S070903216643  Birvtc-t. J. T. 120171 The of  versify A trial,  30.397—414 2011133%97  Birvtet. J & H A. 12016). and  effects Of an therapeutic int&æ-ntion for first-year uni-  versify students. 29,  Karnarck, Memmelstein, A per-  ot 24, 385-396  Crossnen, M, K. Kazduin, A & Knudson, k. 120151. Brief unstru;tured  interaction with a dog reduces distress, AnthratOåS, 28, 649-659.  Crump, Co Oerting, T. L (2015), vet the PS'/thOJOE-  iQl and physiologiQI streß ot  NG•th Journal Of Psychology, 17, 575-590  Dell. C. A. O. 1, Rohr. a. C,  Brydges, M. (20151, PAWSing stress: A pilot study  of ttw St. DOE  campuses in Canada. Journal or  49.332-359.  E_ R. A_ R. J_ & Griffin. S (19851  with Life ot 49. 71 "75  J. K.. Kulan. O. Jangrnrbani. M.  Vcyacek. M, Suicidal behavior and distress in uni-  A of filicide 20.  D_ Hart. E. P M_ & McGuigan. (20171 The of  dog-assisted inter-ventim on student mood, anxiety,  of 14.  J. Mueller, M, K, (2017), Animal-assisted Stress redwttion  progm-E in «iuQtion.  ore'101C07/s107S5-017-9392-o  Hefrw. J. & CL 120091. mental  college of 79, 491—199,](../../_resources/6cd0739f5510b4db3479d99641fcc4f8.png)

![Machine generated alternative text: WILEY  Katchw. A & A M. 120101. Ne•« oldU the  theragxmtic effects of animals and nature. In H, Fine (Ed). Handbook  (3rd ed.) 49—58). San Diego, CA, Else-Viet Acade:nic Press.  P. 00. W N. P. S, & Y. (20151 Effects of  relaEffion interventions on depression and anxiety among adults.  Aging '-eth, 19. 1043-1055 https_•//  101080/136078632014.997191  Logan. A (20161 C'Ædle tight  blues away. Retrieved June 12. 2017, from  H M. (2010). in unims.ty students A  parison with general mpulation data. 45141  249-251  Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, A. validation  of brief of and PANAS  cay  2016,' 1 ra b p  Of Personality Social 54. 1053,  Wens. L (2C091 cffccts of a  Journo' of Issues, 65, 523-saa_  SUPPORTING INFORMATION  Adcitional Suppwting Information be found mline  supporting information tab for this article.  in the  & H. (1999). A of wbjectiw  Preliminary refiabilitv and validation. SOGO/  46. 137-155  McDonald, S.. McDonald. Roberts, A (2017), Effects Of dog  prW to  of 19.477484.  Rollit. L 120161 UBC ot dog  Students. Retrieved June 13, 2017, from  09,'u e d ck-k3  C. & A, L (1991), The MOS SuDVOtt  Mediciw 32, 705-714. 1016/0277.  953491090150-b  HOW to Cite this article Ward-Griffin E. Klaiber P. Collins HK,  Owens RL_ Corer. S. Chen Petting away stress:  The effect of therapy dog sessions on student well-being.  Stress and Health. 2018;1-6. httPS/&iOWIO.1002/](../../_resources/725312104bab2a26d2f5143a469d389a.png)

Created with Microsoft OneNote 2016.